Add java local https post (#1029)
oktadeveloper/okta-blog: _source/_posts/2022-01-30-local-https-java.adoc

---
layout: blog_post
title: "HTTPS for Local Java Development"
author: brian-demers
by: advocate
communities: [java]

> description: ""

Author: TODO

tags: [java, security, https, localhost, spring, spring-boot]
tweets:
- ""
- ""
- ""

> image:

Author: TODO

type: awareness
---
:page-liquid:
:toc: macro
:experimental:

If you're developing a web application, chances are you want your dev environment as close to production as possible. One of the often-overlooked differences between local development and production servers is the use of Transport Layer Security (TLS), or Hypertext Transfer Protocol Secure (HTTPS). In this post, I'll cover three different options to get your local Java app running with TLS in no time!

toc::[]

== Start with a Simple Java Application

To test out these options, you will, of course, need a Java web application. If you already have one handy, skip this step!

> Bootstrap a new application using the https://start.spring.io/#!type=maven-project&language=java&packaging=jar&jvmVersion=11&groupId=com.example&artifactId=demo&name=demo&description=Demo%20project%20for%20Spring%20Boot&packageName=com.example.demo&dependencies=web,devtools[Spring Initializer]. Clicking on that link will automatically add the `web` and `devtools` dependencies.

Reviewer: I like the no Spring Boot version number. Since our posts with versions get deprecated and stop working after a couple years, I think we need to switch to no version number of `git clone` as the defaults.

1. Download the project using the *Generate* button.
2. Extract the zip file.
3. Open the project with your favorite IDE.

The last thing to do, is add a basic `RestController` in `src/main/java/com/example/demo/HelloController.java`:

[source,java]
----
package com.example.demo;

import org.springframework.web.bind.annotation.GetMapping;
import org.springframework.web.bind.annotation.RestController;

@RestController
public class HelloController {

    @GetMapping("/")
    public String sayHello() {
        return "Yes, this is another Hello World...";
    }
}
----

That's it, start the application! Either from your IDE or by running `./mvnw spring-boot:run`.

> Now access this boring, non-secure application in your browser: `\http://localhost:8080/`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Now access this boring, non-secure application in your browser at`\http://localhost:8080/`.
```

== HTTPS using an Internet proxy

One of the quickest ways to get a local application running with TLS is to use an internet proxy like ngrok.
https://ngrok.com/download[Download and install ngrok] and then start up the service using:

[source,bash]
----
ngrok http 8080
----

This command will expose your local service running port `8080` over the internet on a _generated_ URL such as `\https://abcd-11-22-33-44.ngrok.io`.

If you don't want to install ngrok, you could use https://localhost.run/[localhost.run], which works using SSH port forwarding; try it out with:

[source,bash]
----
ssh -R 80:localhost:8080 nokey@localhost.run
----

> Similar to ngrok, a temporary URL will be generated: `\https://152ccb7ac9369e.lhr.life`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Similar to ngrok, a temporary URL will be generated. For example, `\https://152ccb7ac9369e.lhr.life`.
```

The goal of these tools is to provide a publicly available URL for your local development, which is perfect if you want to share something via the internet. If you don't, it's best not to expose your development machine to any potential attackers online. The following two options avoid this issue.

== Create a certificate authority with mkcert

> The next two options use a tool called https://github.com/FiloSottile/mkcert[`mkcert`] which sets up a locally trusted certificate authority (CA), installed into the trust stores on your computer. Any certificates issued by this CA will be trusted by the client of your choice (Chrome, Firefox, curl, etc)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The next two options use a tool called https://github.com/FiloSottile/mkcert[`mkcert`] which sets up a locally trusted certificate authority (CA), installed into the trust stores on your computer. Any certificates issued by this CA will be trusted by the client of your choice (Chrome, Firefox, curl, etc).
```

> On macOS, you can install `mkcert` with Homebrew; for other operating systems you can find instructions in the https://github.com/FiloSottile/mkcert#installation[`mkcert` readme].

Reviewer: ```suggestion
On macOS, you can install `mkcert` with Homebrew; for other operating systems you can find instructions in the https://github.com/FiloSottile/mkcert#installation[`mkcert` docs].
```

[source,bash]
----
brew install mkcert nss
# nss is only needed if you are using Firefox
----

Create and install the certificate authority:

====
[source,bash]
----
mkcert -install
----

[source,txt]
----
Created a new local CA 💥
Sudo password:
The local CA is now installed in the system trust store! ⚡️
The local CA is now installed in Java's trust store! ☕️
----

> ====

Reviewer: This looks fine, but `====` is usually only necessary when you have callouts in the code.

[IMPORTANT]
====

If you are on macOS and using https://httpie.io/[HTTPie], you will need to add the CA to https://github.com/httpie/httpie/issues/480[HTTPie manually]: +

[source,bash]
----
cat "$(mkcert --CAROOT)/rootCA.pem" >> \
$(brew --prefix)/Cellar/httpie/*/libexec/lib/python*/site-packages/certifi/cacert.pem
----
====

> That was _mostly_ painless, now let's secure our application!

Reviewer: ```suggestion
That was _mostly_ painless, now let's secure the application you just created!
```

== Reverse proxy with Nginx

Many production applications terminate TLS using a reverse proxy like Nginx; this can also be an excellent option for local development and has the added advantage of working with any web application framework.

To run Nginx, I'll use the https://hub.docker.com/_/nginx[official Nginx Docker image]. To keep things organized, create a new directory to hold the configuration:

[source,bash]
----
mkdir localhost-tls
cd localhost-tls
----

Next, use `mkcert` to generate the certificates Nginx will use.

[source,bash]
----
mkdir devcerts
mkcert -key-file devcerts/key.pem -cert-file devcerts/cert.pem localhost
----

This command generates a private key and certificate in the new `devcerts` directory for the host, `localhost`.

> Create an `nginx-default.conf.template` configuration file

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Create an `nginx-default.conf.template` configuration file:
```

====
[source,conf]
----
server {
    listen 80;
    server_name _;
    rewrite ^/(.*)$ https://$host$request_uri? permanent; # <.>
}

server {
  server_name _;

  location / {
    proxy_pass http://host.docker.internal:${TARGET_PORT}; # <.>

    # <.>
    proxy_set_header Host $host;
    proxy_set_header X-Real-IP $remote_addr;
    proxy_set_header X-Forwarded-For $proxy_add_x_forwarded_for;
    proxy_set_header X-Forwarded-Host $host:443;
    proxy_set_header X-Forwarded-Port 443;
    proxy_set_header X-Forwarded-Server $host;
    proxy_set_header X-Forwarded-Proto https;
  }

  listen 443 ssl;
  ssl_certificate /etc/nginx/certs/cert.pem;
  ssl_certificate_key /etc/nginx/certs/key.pem;
}
----
<.> Redirect all http requests to https.
<.> Windows and Mac hosts run Docker in a VM, the hostname `host.docker.internal` is used to point back to the "host" OS and the port.
<.> Set the proxy headers, so the downstream app will know what URL the client is using.
====

=== Tie it all together with Docker

> Now that we have our Java application, the certificates, and the Nginx configuration ready to go, the only thing left is to start it up!

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Now that you have your Java application, the certificates, and the Nginx configuration ready to go, the only thing left is to start it up!
```

Start Nginx with `docker run` mapping the above files as volumes to configure the service.

====
[source,bash]
----
docker run \
    -v $(pwd)/nginx-default.conf.template:/etc/nginx/templates/default.conf.template \ # <.>
    -v $(pwd)/devcerts:/etc/nginx/certs \ # <.>
    -p 443:443 \
    -p 80:80 \
    --env TARGET_PORT=8080 \ # <.>
    nginx
----
<.> The Nginx configuration file template.
<.> The path to the certificates.
<.> The port where your application is running on `localhost`.
====

> NOTE: You can codify this solution using a https://github.com/bdemers/localhost-tls/blob/main/docker-compose.yml[docker-compose.yml file] if you prefer!

Author: TODO: need to fork to `oktadev`

Test it out! Open up your browser to `\https://localhost/`.

> == Configure Spring Boot to use HTTP

Reviewer: Should this be HTTPS?

Author: Good catch!!! 🤦

> == Configure Spring Boot to use HTTP

Author: ```suggestion
== Configure Spring Boot to use HTTPS
```

The previous options used a separate service to handle TLS; this time, I'll configure Spring Boot's embedded Tomcat server to terminate TLS directly.

Generate another set of certificates with `mkcert`, but this time set the output format to `pkcs12`, which is a format the Java Keystore understands.

[source,bash]
----
# create the directory
mkdir -p ~/.config/spring-boot

# generate a certificate in pkcs12 format
mkcert -pkcs12 -p12-file ~/.config/spring-boot/local-tls.p12 localhost
----

> Create a properties file `~/.config/spring-boot/spring-boot-devtools.properties` containing the server port and newly genrated key store location.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Create a properties file `~/.config/spring-boot/spring-boot-devtools.properties` containing the server port and newly generated key store location.
```

[TIP]
====
I didn't need to make any changes to my application because it's using https://docs.spring.io/spring-boot/docs/current/reference/html/using.html[Spring Boot DevTools], which automatically includes the above properties file. If you are *not* using DevTools, you can mimic this behavior by setting an environment variable before starting your application:

[source,bash]
----
SPRING_CONFIG_IMPORT='${user.home}/.config/spring-boot/spring-boot-devtools.properties'
----
====

== Bonus: add a hostname alias

The above examples use `localhost`, which works, but you might want to use a different hostname. One easy way to do this is to add a hostname alias to your `/etc/hosts` file:

[source,bash]
----
sudo sh -c 'echo "127.0.0.1 local.example" >> /etc/hosts'
----

In the above examples, when generating certificates with `mkcert`, replace `localhost` with your domain name, for example:

[source,bash]
----
mkcert -key-file devcerts/key.pem -cert-file devcerts/cert.pem local.example
----

WARNING: Use a domain name that you own or NOT in the official https://data.iana.org/TLD/tlds-alpha-by-domain.txt[top-level domain list] to ensure there are no conflicting or hijacked DNS entries.

> 

Reviewer: I'd like to see a section on the downsides of using TLS for local development. I was a big advocate for HTTPS locally a couple of years ago when I [wrote a post on it](https://developer.okta.com/blog/2019/03/07/spring-microservices-https-oauth2). However, I found myself reverting back to HTTP because I experienced caching issues. For example, Chrome would always redirect to HTTPS and I'd have to flush the cache to fix it.

[neverssl.com](http://neverssl.com) is a good tip for joining wi-fi when on the road too, but might not fit into this post.

Author: I love this idea! I try to add a few lines about it!

> == Learn more about building secure applications

Reviewer: You might mention Java here since you only link to Java tutorials.

> == Learn more about building secure applications

Author: ```suggestion
== Learn more about building secure Java applications
```

---
layout: blog_post
title: "HTTPS for Local Java Development"
author: brian-demers
by: advocate
communities: [java]
description: ""
tags: [java, security, https, localhost, spring, spring-boot]
tweets:
- ""
- ""
- ""
image:
type: awareness
---
:page-liquid:
:toc: macro
:experimental:

If you're developing a web application, chances are you want your dev environment as close to production as possible. One of the often-overlooked differences between local development and production servers is the use of Transport Layer Security (TLS), or Hypertext Transfer Protocol Secure (HTTPS). In this post, I'll cover three different options to get your local Java app running with TLS in no time!

toc::[]

> == Start with a Simple Java Application

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
== Start with a simple Java application
```
sentence case

To test out these options, you will, of course, need a Java web application. If you already have one handy, skip this step!

Bootstrap a new application using the https://start.spring.io/#!type=maven-project&language=java&packaging=jar&jvmVersion=11&groupId=com.example&artifactId=demo&name=demo&description=Demo%20project%20for%20Spring%20Boot&packageName=com.example.demo&dependencies=web,devtools[Spring Initializer]. Clicking on that link will automatically add the `web` and `devtools` dependencies.

1. Download the project using the *Generate* button.
2. Extract the zip file.
3. Open the project with your favorite IDE.

> The last thing to do, is add a basic `RestController` in `src/main/java/com/example/demo/HelloController.java`:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The last thing to do is to add a basic `RestController` in `src/main/java/com/example/demo/HelloController.java`:
```
comma not needed, verb needs 'to'

[source,java]
----
package com.example.demo;

import org.springframework.web.bind.annotation.GetMapping;
import org.springframework.web.bind.annotation.RestController;

@RestController
public class HelloController {

    @GetMapping("/")
    public String sayHello() {
        return "Yes, this is another Hello World...";
    }
}
----

> That's it, start the application! Either from your IDE or by running `./mvnw spring-boot:run`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
That's it! Start the application either from your IDE or by running `./mvnw spring-boot:run`.
```
moved the punctuation to avoid the sentence fragment and keep the enthusiasm ;-)

Now access this boring, non-secure application in your browser at`\http://localhost:8080/`.

> == HTTPS using an Internet proxy

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
== HTTPS using an internet proxy
```
capitalization not required

One of the quickest ways to get a local application running with TLS is to use an internet proxy like ngrok.
https://ngrok.com/download[Download and install ngrok] and then start up the service using:

[source,bash]
----
ngrok http 8080
----

This command will expose your local service running port `8080` over the internet on a _generated_ URL such as `\https://abcd-11-22-33-44.ngrok.io`.

> If you don't want to install ngrok, you could use https://localhost.run/[localhost.run], which works using SSH port forwarding; try it out with:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
If you don't want to install ngrok, you could use https://localhost.run/[localhost.run], which works using SSH port forwarding. Try it out with:
```
clarity

[source,bash]
----
ssh -R 80:localhost:8080 nokey@localhost.run
----

Similar to ngrok, a temporary URL will be generated. For example, `\https://152ccb7ac9369e.lhr.life`.

> The goal of these tools is to provide a publicly available URL for your local development, which is perfect if you want to share something via the internet. If you don't, it's best not to expose your development machine to any potential attackers online. The following two options avoid this issue.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The goal of these tools is to provide a publicly available URL for your local development, which is perfect if you want to share something via the internet. If you don't want to share, it's best not to expose your development machine to any potential attackers online. The following two options avoid this issue.
```
clarity

== Create a certificate authority with mkcert

> The next two options use a tool called https://github.com/FiloSottile/mkcert[`mkcert`] which sets up a locally trusted certificate authority (CA), installed into the trust stores on your computer. Any certificates issued by this CA will be trusted by the client of your choice (Chrome, Firefox, curl, etc).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The next two options use a tool called https://github.com/FiloSottile/mkcert[`mkcert`], which sets up a locally trusted certificate authority (CA), installed into the trust stores on your computer. Any certificates issued by this CA will be trusted by the client of your choice (Chrome, Firefox, curl, etc).
```
comma before which

On macOS, you can install `mkcert` with Homebrew; for other operating systems you can find instructions in the https://github.com/FiloSottile/mkcert#installation[`mkcert` docs].

[source,bash]
----
brew install mkcert nss
# nss is only needed if you are using Firefox
----

Create and install the certificate authority:

====
[source,bash]
----
mkcert -install
----

[source,txt]
----
Created a new local CA 💥
Sudo password:
The local CA is now installed in the system trust store! ⚡️
The local CA is now installed in Java's trust store! ☕️
----
====

[IMPORTANT]
====

If you are on macOS and using https://httpie.io/[HTTPie], you will need to add the CA to https://github.com/httpie/httpie/issues/480[HTTPie manually]: +

[source,bash]
----
cat "$(mkcert --CAROOT)/rootCA.pem" >> \
$(brew --prefix)/Cellar/httpie/*/libexec/lib/python*/site-packages/certifi/cacert.pem
----
====

That was _mostly_ painless, now let's secure the application you just created!

== Reverse proxy with Nginx

> Many production applications terminate TLS using a reverse proxy like Nginx; this can also be an excellent option for local development and has the added advantage of working with any web application framework.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Many production applications terminate TLS using a reverse proxy like Nginx. This can also be an excellent option for local development and has the added advantage of working with any web application framework.
```
breaks up a long sentence

====
[source,conf]
----
server {
    listen 80;
    server_name _;
    rewrite ^/(.*)$ https://$host$request_uri? permanent; # <.>
}

server {
  server_name _;

  location / {
    proxy_pass http://host.docker.internal:${TARGET_PORT}; # <.>

    # <.>
    proxy_set_header Host $host;
    proxy_set_header X-Real-IP $remote_addr;
    proxy_set_header X-Forwarded-For $proxy_add_x_forwarded_for;
    proxy_set_header X-Forwarded-Host $host:443;
    proxy_set_header X-Forwarded-Port 443;
    proxy_set_header X-Forwarded-Server $host;
    proxy_set_header X-Forwarded-Proto https;
  }

  listen 443 ssl;
  ssl_certificate /etc/nginx/certs/cert.pem;
  ssl_certificate_key /etc/nginx/certs/key.pem;
}
----
<.> Redirect all http requests to https.
<.> Windows and Mac hosts run Docker in a VM, the hostname `host.docker.internal` is used to point back to the "host" OS and the port.
<.> Set the proxy headers, so the downstream app will know what URL the client is using.
====

=== Tie it all together with Docker

Now that you have your Java application, the certificates, and the Nginx configuration ready to go, the only thing left is to start it up!

> Start Nginx with `docker run` mapping the above files as volumes to configure the service.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Use `docker run` to start Nginx with the above files as volumes that configure the service.
```
hopefully simpler. it was "mapping" that threw me off.

====
[source,bash]
----
docker run \
    -v $(pwd)/nginx-default.conf.template:/etc/nginx/templates/default.conf.template \ # <.>
    -v $(pwd)/devcerts:/etc/nginx/certs \ # <.>
    -p 443:443 \
    -p 80:80 \
    --env TARGET_PORT=8080 \ # <.>
    nginx
----
<.> The Nginx configuration file template.
<.> The path to the certificates.
<.> The port where your application is running on `localhost`.
====

NOTE: You can codify this solution using a https://github.com/bdemers/localhost-tls/blob/main/docker-compose.yml[docker-compose.yml file] if you prefer!

Test it out! Open up your browser to `\https://localhost/`.

== Configure Spring Boot to use HTTPS

The previous options used a separate service to handle TLS; this time, I'll configure Spring Boot's embedded Tomcat server to terminate TLS directly.

> Generate another set of certificates with `mkcert`, but this time set the output format to `pkcs12`, which is a format the Java Keystore understands.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Generate another set of certificates with `mkcert`. This time set the output format to `pkcs12`, which is a format the Java KeyStore understands.
```
long sentence into two sentences. seems to be 'officially' camelcase

[source,bash]
----
# create the directory
mkdir -p ~/.config/spring-boot

# generate a certificate in pkcs12 format
mkcert -pkcs12 -p12-file ~/.config/spring-boot/local-tls.p12 localhost
----

> Create a properties file `~/.config/spring-boot/spring-boot-devtools.properties` containing the server port and newly generated key store location.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Create a properties file `~/.config/spring-boot/spring-boot-devtools.properties` containing the server port and newly generated keystore location.
```
let's keep it one word.

[source,properties]
----
# Set the port
server.port=8443

# configure the key store path
server.ssl.key-store=${user.home}/.config/spring-boot/local-tls.p12
----

Now restart your Spring Boot application, and open your browser to `\https://localhost:8443` to access your newly secured application!

[TIP]
====
I didn't need to make any changes to my application because it's using https://docs.spring.io/spring-boot/docs/current/reference/html/using.html[Spring Boot DevTools], which automatically includes the above properties file. If you are *not* using DevTools, you can mimic this behavior by setting an environment variable before starting your application:

[source,bash]
----
SPRING_CONFIG_IMPORT='${user.home}/.config/spring-boot/spring-boot-devtools.properties'
----
====

== Bonus: Use a different hostname

The above examples use `localhost`, which works, but you might want to use a different hostname. One easy way to do this is to add a hostname alias to your `/etc/hosts` file:

[source,bash]
----
sudo sh -c 'echo "127.0.0.1 local.example" >> /etc/hosts'
----

> In the above examples, when generating certificates with `mkcert`, replace `localhost` with your domain name, for example:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In the above examples, when generating certificates with `mkcert`, replace `localhost` with your domain name. Here's an example:
```
making a 2nd sentence

[source,bash]
----
mkcert -key-file devcerts/key.pem -cert-file devcerts/cert.pem local.example
----

> WARNING: Use a domain name that you own or NOT in the official https://data.iana.org/TLD/tlds-alpha-by-domain.txt[top-level domain list] to ensure there are no conflicting or hijacked DNS entries.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
WARNING: Use a domain name that you own or that is NOT in the official https://data.iana.org/TLD/tlds-alpha-by-domain.txt[top-level domain list] to ensure there are no conflicting or hijacked DNS entries.
```
clarity

== Potential problems using HTTPS for local development

> It's not all sunshine and roses, there are a few things to watch out for. If you are a developer that works on multiple applications.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
It's not all sunshine and roses. If you are a developer that works on multiple applications there are a few things to watch out for.
```
a little rearranging for clarity. avoids the sentence fragment.

> If you are switching between applications that run on HTTP and HTTPS prototypes, your browser may automatically switch to HTTPS, especially one of your applications sets the https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/HTTP/Headers/Strict-Transport-Security[HTTP Strict-Transport-Security (HTST) headers]. If you run into this type of problem you can clear the https://www.a2hosting.com/kb/getting-started-guide/internet-and-networking/clearing-a-web-browsers-ssl-state[SSL State] and/or https://www.thesslstore.com/blog/clear-hsts-settings-chrome-firefox/[HSTS settings] in your browser.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
If you are switching between applications that run on HTTP and HTTPS prototypes, your browser may automatically switch to HTTPS, especially if one of your applications sets the https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/HTTP/Headers/Strict-Transport-Security[HTTP Strict-Transport-Security (HTST) headers]. If you run into this type of problem you can clear the https://www.a2hosting.com/kb/getting-started-guide/internet-and-networking/clearing-a-web-browsers-ssl-state[SSL State] and/or https://www.thesslstore.com/blog/clear-hsts-settings-chrome-firefox/[HSTS settings] in your browser.
```
i think it's a missing word typo

> TIP: Use different hostname for each application you are working on to avoid any browser caching.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
TIP: Use a different hostname for each application you are working on to avoid browser caching.
```
add one word, remove another...

== Learn more about building secure Java applications

> This post has demonstrated three options for running applications locally using TLS/HTTPS. They each have strengths and weaknesses.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This post has demonstrated three options for running applications locally using TLS/HTTPS. Each option has its own strengths and weaknesses.
```
clarifies "They..."

* Using an Internet proxy exposes your application to the world; however, this could be what you want if you are testing link:/docs/concepts/inline-hooks/[web hooks].

> * Running a reverse proxy will work for any application, but it's one more service to manage (or likely, in my case, forget to start).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* Running a reverse proxy will work for any application, but it's one more service to manage (...and remember to start 😉  ).  
```
essentially the same joke

> * Directly in Spring Boot application, "just works™️" once it's setup, but it cannot use the default HTTPS port (`443`) unless you employ some other workaround, like (https://mcaikovski.blogspot.com/2018/01/forwarding-ports-80-to-8080-or-443-to.html[iptables], https://serverfault.com/questions/112795/how-to-run-a-server-on-port-80-as-a-normal-user-on-linux#answer-112805[authbind], https://techblog.jeppson.org/2017/12/make-java-run-privileged-ports-centos-7/[setcap], etc.).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* Running directly in the Spring Boot application, _just works_™️ once it's set up. However, it cannot use the default HTTPS port (`443`) without some other workaround, like (https://mcaikovski.blogspot.com/2018/01/forwarding-ports-80-to-8080-or-443-to.html[iptables], https://serverfault.com/questions/112795/how-to-run-a-server-on-port-80-as-a-normal-user-on-linux#answer-112805[authbind], https://techblog.jeppson.org/2017/12/make-java-run-privileged-ports-centos-7/[setcap], etc.).
```
clarifying the "just worksTM" and turning one sentence into two.
